so today I want to talk about Messier
109 so definitely one of the high
numbered ones and it's a barred spiral
galaxy again this is what it looks like
pretty beautiful
so most people call this the theta
galaxy because it kind of looks like a
theta you know a Greek symbol like we
using maths all the time so you know
kind of a sixty symbols cross over and
away the théâtre galaxy and it's in the
constellation of Ursa Major which most
people might know by different names so
a great bear the Big Dipper in the UK we
call it the plough the whole
constellation of Ursa Major the plough
is obviously the bit that's sort of
brighter there in that image and m109 is
just underneath that star there so if
you have binoculars you might be able to
see something a little bit fuzzy if you
go out and find it also while you're
there I don't know if most people know
but this star in the plough there's
actually a double star and if you get
binoculars you can see that which it's
kind of cool so while we were in the
plough
I thought maybe I throw that okay so the
reason that m109 is kind of special is
because it has something that's called
an answer bar here's the spiral arms of
the galaxy around the outside you've got
that central bulge there but you've also
got this bar running through the middle
then at the ends of that bar you'll see
there's sort of two concentrations there
almost makes it look a little bit like a
racing car steering wheel the ones and
then where the outside kind of looks
like that so these are all examples of
galaxies with bars so on this side
you've got the main galaxy image and
then here they've sort of edited it a
bit so that you only see the sort of
brightest features and you can see that
these little concentrations at the end
of the bar pop up in each case that one
really looks like a racing car steering
wheel and then this one you can even see
that you've got the little blobs here
and then you've got this sort of weird X
bar one of these peanut bars that Mike
talks about a couple of months ago which
I think really interesting as well so
I've got a kind of a cool book this week
yeah the devolo atlas of galaxies this
is actually a really really famous book
it basically details most of the NGC
galaxies that we see in the sky so this
m109 is NGC 399 - so really deep sky
objects well they also do is give a
really nice introduction in the book
to how galaxies are classified Hubble
was one of the first people to actually
try and do this Edwin Hubble back in
sort of at the 1920s and he came up with
a really classic tuning fork diagram you
can see that we've got all our spiral
galaxies on this side of this sort of
tuning fork and then you've got all of
the round
elliptical blob --is-- galaxies on this
side of the tuning fork and the idea is
that you also have two strands one which
is barred spiral galaxies every one of
which is out barred so m109 is
definitely down on this track and then
you new up things that kind of look like
they're spiral shaped or like a disc but
they don't actually have any spiral
structure in there they're sort of just
sort of flat and featureless they kind
of on their way to becoming these like
round globish things and we call these
galaxies on this side early type
galaxies and the galaxies on the
right-hand side of the tuning fork late
type galaxies in the late types the
spirals you have lots of complex
structure and in the early types the
ellipticals you have really sort of like
you know boring just blob --is-- you
know very featureless structure now what
we know is that actually evolution goes
from sort of this side of the diagram
where you collapse and form a disk of
stars and then you move to this side of
the diagram as you evolve and galaxies
merge and so this book also gives you
lots of nice examples of bad galaxies as
well see there's a couple and so this
shows you the sort of evolution of
galaxies along that diagram as well so
you go from the things with the most
complexes of structures where the spiral
arms are very loose and everything is
sort of very flocculent we call it like
very sort of fluffy to going to more
tightly wound spiral arms getting
tighter and tighter until you end up
with galaxies like this appear where
they're almost at that stage where
there's no spiral structure left and
they're sort of it this sort of early
type spiral phase they call it all
through this Atlas you'll find galaxies
that it says oh yeah there's a man say
in this one or there isn't one in this
one etc but nobody really knows why
they're there how they form what
relation they have to the bar itself
since they're at the end of the bar so
it's a little bit of a puzzle 2007 there
was in this paper which was a
statistical study of an say in barred
galaxies basically they went through
that atlas of galaxies that de vocal are
put together they basically counted how
many ants a were found in the certain
types of barred galaxies so they've got
lots of nice pretty pictures of more an
say in here but they've also got this
little figure here so this is a
histogram of the
percentage of barred galaxies that have
an say for the different types along
that tuning fork diagram so they start
down here with sort of the SI galaxies
those are the ones that had the very
tightly round spiral arms and then they
go all the way out to SC and SD galaxies
that were very loose spiral arms that
you can see basically the earlier the
type of spiral galaxy you are the more
likely you are to have an unsay and it
drops off so that as soon as you get end
up with like loose round spiral arms
you're not going to have one of these
unsafe features except the m109 is an SC
galaxy so it's one of these ones with
quite loose spiral arms if we look back
at the image again you can see that
there's lots of complex structure in
there they're quite loose wound so
they're sort of not one of these early
type structures it's definitely one of
these late type spirals so this is one
of the rare ones so the paper also
looked very like statistical correlation
with rings so we see lots of ring
galaxies before we talked about that on
this channel because there tend to be
correlated with bars but actually there
was no correlation with the ring because
if you think about the ante
it's almost kind of like it's a part of
a section of the ring in a way like
you've lost the sort of tops in the
bottom bit but actually they found there
was no correlation with like bars and
rings and bars with an says in this
paper it took until actually earlier
this year for a simulation paper to
really come out actually studying what
was going on in in these ante
so I've got that paper - this one
building the peanut great title you know
in simulations how do you get these
structures in galaxies with bars they
might not have pretty pictures of actual
space but they've got pretty pictures of
simulations I mean they're not as cool
but that's the pretty cool these are the
images of the simulations that they've
made and so they're at different times
so they start from T of zero over here
and they end up ten billion years later
and these are at the different snapshots
in that simulation and so they're saying
that the answer basically doesn't form
on the bar for a very long time so like
four to ten Giggy is very precise well
they actually found in this paper was
that there is this very strong
connection to these peanut bars these
peanut bulges so might talked about this
where if you have a bar structure in a
galaxy you have instabilities in that
disk which you're going to cause that
bar to sort of fly
around and break and what that causes is
that you end up spreading the stars out
and you end up getting a kind of an X
structure as it flops around and that
can tend to look like a sort of a peanut
in a shell and so what they found is
that that's actually very tightly linked
to the answer as well so that answer to
form one of those things you've also
need not just one of these instabilities
but you need two of them to occur
obviously they're things that happen in
very very long timescales which is why
you kind of have to wait around so long
for one of these things and it's that
spreading out at the end of the
instabilities that they think is what's
causing the answer so when you see the
major on you see these peanut structures
when you look at face on galaxies you
quite often see these bar like
structures and they're just an
instability that if you just have a disk
of stars all orbiting around initially
on circular orbits they tend to
rearrange themselves in this way to
create these bars in the middle